new Upgrade Astro page incl semantic versioning (#7396)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/upgrade-astro.mdx

Major releases allow Astro to make significant changes not only to internal logic, but also to intended behavior and usage. Documentation will be updated to reflect the latest version only, and **static, unmaintained snapshots of older docs** are available as a historical record for older projects that are not yet upgraded.

Major releases include changes such as:

- Removal of previously deprecated functionalities.
- Changes of existing functionalities.
- Changes of existing options in the integration hooks.
- Changes of existing options and functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

A major release may also include some non-breaking changes and improvements that would normally be released separately in a minor or patch release.

### Exceptions

- **Experimental features**. Releasing versions of Astro without adhering to semantic versioning allows Astro developers the greatest flexibility to explore, and even radically change course, during the development of experimental features. Therefore, the behavior of these features can break in minor and patch changes.

>   These features are usually accompanied by ongoing, public [Request for Consideration (RFC) stage 3](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap#stage-3-rfc--development). It is expected that beta users will follow for updates, and leave early feedback to help guide development of these features.
> 
>   Once these features are out of their experimentation period, they will follow the normal semantic versioning contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  These features are usually accompanied by an ongoing, public [Request for Consideration (RFC) stage 3](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap#stage-3-rfc--development). It is expected that beta users will follow for updates, and leave early feedback on the discussion to help guide development of these features.

  Once these features are out of their experimental period, they will follow the normal semantic versioning contract.
```

### Patch changes

Patch changes are the least disruptive changes. They do not change the way you use Astro, and no change to your own code is required when you update.

When Astro issues a "patch" version, the last number increases. (e.g. `astro@4.3.14` -> `astro@4.3.15`)

Patches may be released for reasons such as:

- Internal changes that do not change Astro’s functionality:
  - refactors
  - performance improvements
  - increase or change in test coverage
  - aligning with stated documentation and expected behavior
- Improvements to logging and error messages.
- Re-releases after a failed release.

Patch changes also include **most bug fixes**, even in cases where users were taking advantage of existing unintended or undesirable behavior.

### Minor changes

Minor releases primarily introduce new features and improvements that you may wish to try, but require no changes to your code. Some existing features may also be **deprecated** (marked for deletion in a future version while continuing to function) in a minor release, giving you the opportunity to prepare for their eventual removal.

> Minor releases include changes such as:
> 
> - **Deprecations** of existing features/options.
> - Introduction of new functionalities.
> - Upgrade of minimum required Node.js version (minor or patch), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`.
>   :::note
>   We take these kind of changes very seriously, and approve them only if we think that a new version of Node.js can improve the security or developer experience of our users, and impact core functionalities.
>   :::
> - Introduction of new options in the integration hooks.
> - Introduction of new functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.
> 
> A minor release may also include smaller, patch changes at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Minor releases include changes such as:

- **Deprecations** of existing features/options with a warning that they will be removed in an upcoming major release.
- Introduction of new functionalities.
- Introduction of new options in the integration hooks.
- Introduction of new functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

:::note
Minor releases are meant to include only non-breaking changes.  However, *in rare cases*, Astro will include an upgrade of the minimum required Node.js version in a minor release (e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`).

Astro is committed to adhering to semantic versioning, and will include an upgrade to a new version of Node.js in a minor release after careful analysis of a variety of factors, including the number of Astro projects running on incompatible versions, the security risk to developers of supporting an older version of Node.js, and the impact on Astro's core functionalities.
:::

A minor release may also include smaller, patch changes at the same time.
```

So, here's a suggested edit to start from! I'm not sure whether this is still too handwavy, BUT:
- I moved this rare edge case to the end, since we don't really need to stick something that almost never happens in the middle of a list
- I put the whole thing in the note, since the list doesn't have to be exhaustive (include changes such as...) and this is *all* kind of an aside. This gives you more flexibility in how you discuss it.

---
title: Upgrade Astro
description: Learn how to upgrade Astro
i18nReady: true
---
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro';
import Version from '~/components/Version.astro';

This guide covers how to update your version of Astro and related dependencies, how to learn what has changed from one version to the next, and how to understand Astro's versioning system and corresponding documentation updates.

## What has changed?
The latest release of Astro is <Version pkgName="astro" />.

> You can find an exhaustive list of all changes in [Astro's changelog](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md), and important instructions for upgrading to each new [major version](#major-changes) in our [upgrade guides](#upgrade-guides).

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this is suggestion needs it's own separate discussion (to ensure consistency throughout the docs). Thoughts on making the external link to Astro's Changelog open in a new tab? 

Since markdown doesn't have a built in way to do this, a simple component could be created to implement this. While this is a subjective suggestion, personally, I do find it a bit annoying to have the link open in the current page.

Reviewer: Our practice is to never open links in new tabs for consistency and accessibility. It's generally considered better practice to allow users to control that behaviour (everyone can choose to open in a new tab, but if you force a new tab, you take that control away from them).

Reviewer 2: Good to know! Thank you for clarifying this :)!

  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  # Example: upgrade Astro with React and Tailwind integrations
  yarn add astro@latest @astrojs/react@latest @astrojs/tailwind@latest
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

### Install a specific version number

To install a specific [version of Astro](https://www.npmjs.com/package/astro?activeTab=versions) or integrations, use the appropriate command for your package manager.

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npm install astro@4.5.3 @astrojs/react@3.0.10
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm add astro@4.5.3 @astrojs/react@3.0.10
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn add astro@4.5.3 @astrojs/react@3.0.10
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

## Documentation updates

This documentation is updated for each [minor release](#minor-changes) and [major version release](#major-changes). When new features are added, or existing usage changes, the docs will update to reflect the **current behavior of Astro**. If your project is not updated, then you may notice some behaviors do not match the up-to-date documentation. 

> New features are added to docs with the specific version number in which they were added. This means that if you have not updated to the latest release of Astro, some documented features may be unavailable. Always check the `Added in:` version number and make sure your project is updated before attempting to use new features!

Reviewer 2: Possible improvement to the wording of this sentence:
```suggestion
New features are added to docs with the specific version number in which they were added. This means that if you have not updated to the latest release of Astro, some documented features may be unavailable. Always check the `Added in:` version number to ensure your project version is compatible with the features you want to use.
```

Reviewer: I think both versions are pretty comparable! In this specific context, on a page about upgrading/updating and how we document *new* features, I *do* slightly prefer the extra nudge to update their project to use new features, but I don't have a *strong* preference. Yours uses *slightly* move elevated language, which can be *slightly* more work to translate properly, or a bit of friction for people reading in their second language, but it's certainly a fine edit!

Is there a problem you're attempting to fix here, so I know the motivation and can better decide between the two wordings?

Reviewer 2: My main goal with this change was to be a bit more clear about that new features meant. Someone could be a version behind from where a feature was introduced but that feature doesn't necessarily have to be in the latest version of Astro. Rewording it to `compatible with...` makes it a bit more clear in my mind.

This is a very minor change and as you mentioned, the two versions are very comparable. I think we could go either way.

Reviewer: s nAgreed, they are comparable and my point here was to keep with the theme of upgrading/new features. So, there's nothing wrong with your suggestion, and on a more generic page I probably would have used it! That's why I asked exactly what problem you were trying to solve, to see what I might be missing.

I think I'll keep this nuance as is for now, but I do appreciate these checks for clarity! :purple_heart:

See the upgrade guides below for an explanation of changes, comparing the new version to the old. The upgrade guides include everything that could require you to change your own code: breaking changes, deprecations, feature removals and replacements as well as updated usage guidance. Each change to Astro includes a "What should I do?" section to help you successfully update your project code.

- [Upgrade to v4](/en/guides/upgrade-to/v4/)
- [Upgrade to v3](/en/guides/upgrade-to/v3/)
- [Upgrade to v2](/en/guides/upgrade-to/v2/)
- [Upgrade to v1](/en/guides/upgrade-to/v1/)

### Older docs (unmaintained)

Documentation for older versions of Astro is not maintained, but is available as a static snapshot. Use these versions of docs if you are unable to upgrade your project, but still wish to consult guides and reference:

- [unmaintained v3.6.3 snapshot](https://docs-git-v3-docs-unmaintained-astrodotbuild.vercel.app/)
- [unmaintained v2.10.15 snapshot](https://deploy-preview-4405--astro-docs-2.netlify.app/en/getting-started/)

## Semantic versioning

> Astro attempts to adhere as much as possible to [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/), which is a set of rules developers use to determine how to assign a version number to a release. Semantic version follows predictable to inform users of the kind of changes they can expect from one version to the next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro attempts to adhere as much as possible to [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/), which is a set of rules developers use to determine how to assign a version number to a release. Semantic version follows a predictable pattern to inform users of the kind of changes they can expect from one version to the next.
```

Semantic versioning enforces a pattern of `X.Y.Z` for software version numbers. These values represent **major (X)**, **minor (Y)**, and **patch (Z)** updates.

### Patch changes

Patch changes are the least disruptive changes. They do not change the way you use Astro, and no change to your own code is required when you update.

When Astro issues a "patch" version, the last number increases. (e.g. `astro@4.3.14` -> `astro@4.3.15`)

Patches may be released for reasons such as:

> - Re-releases after a failed release.
> - Internal changes that do not change Astro’s functionality:
>   - refactors
>   - performance improvements
>   - increase or change in test coverage
>   - aligning with stated documentation and expected behavior
> - Improvements to logging and error messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Internal changes that do not change Astro’s functionality:
  - refactors
  - performance improvements
  - increase or change in test coverage
  - aligning with stated documentation and expected behavior
- Improvements to logging and error messages.
- Re-releases after a failed release.
```

Reviewer 3: This order made more sense to me, since the vast majority of changes are the first point.

> Patch changes also include bug fixes, even in cases where users were taking advantage of existing unintended or undesirable behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Patch changes also include **most bug fixes**, even in cases where users were taking advantage of existing unintended or undesirable behavior.
```
Drawing attention to bug fixes here!

### Minor changes

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Minor releases primarily introduce new features and improvements that you may wish to try, but require no changes to your code. Some existing features may also be **deprecated** (marked for deletion in a future version while continuing to function) in a minor release, giving you the opportunity to prepare for their eventual removal.

Minor releases include changes such as:

- **Deprecations** of existing features/options.
- Introduction of new functionalities.

> - Upgrade of minimal required Node.js version (minor or patch), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Upgrade of minimum required Node.js version (minor or patch), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`.
```

I _think_ minimum fits better than minimal here

> - Upgrade of minimum required Node.js version (minor or patch), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`.

Reviewer 5: Want to flag this one, I don't think we've done this in the past as a normal thing in a minor release. It's possible that we have. Before we document this as a fact I would like to know:

* Have we ever bumped the minimum Node.js version in the past and why did we do it?

My understanding of Semver is that this would be a breaking change and not allowed in a minor release; you are using `18.4.0` and Astro `4.1.0` and Astro releases `4.2.0` and now your builds break; that shouldn't happen.

If there's a very good reason to do so then I think we can make this change but would like to discuss them first.

Reviewer 3: We have never bumped a Node version outside of a major before. The motivation for this change is that right now we're blocked by a very small amount (10-15% depending how you filter the telemetry) of users being on versions that are unsupported by Node themselves (Node only supports the latest minor of extended maintenances releases and even releases)

No production system actually runs those outdated versions, they all run the latest of every major. It's only local dev machines that are outdated (and vulnerable to security issues, since Node doesn't backport security fixes, they expect you to be on the latest of the extended maintenance). It's unlikely that those users are unable to upgrade, as even old LTS of Linux systems will have the latest 

What I suggested (somewhere... I don't remember where) is to allow ourselves to change the minimum minor of *only* the extended maintenance (For Astro 4.x, that'd be requiring to latest minor of 18) and perhaps the LTS.

Reviewer 5: Ok, I think that's a reasonable direction to go. Would still love @bluwy's input here as well.

If we do decide on this policy, I think we should state that explicitly and give the reason why. The current text (below this) says:

> approve them only if we think that a new version of Node.js can improve the security or developer experience of our users, and impact core functionalities.

this gives us too much wiggle room in my opinion. I think this is one case where we should be more explicit to give users more confidence that we're not going to change the version for arbitrary reasons.

Reviewer 6: I agree with that! These cases should be super explicit and hopefully rare. Not really sure how best to communicate the policy on that, but I'd hate for us to develop a reputation like TypeScript where "oh they don't actually follow SemVer"

Author: @matthewp and @natemoo-re, could you please provide some suggestions on how to phrase this?

Reviewer 4: I'm also fine if we really need to bump the node version if there's a big benefit for most users. I suggested emitting warnings beforehand to help soften the impact: https://github.com/withastro/docs/pull/7396#discussion_r1530685955, but otherwise I think projects can bump the node version as long as they document this possibility beforehand.

  :::note

>   We take these kind of changes very seriously, and approve them only if we think that a new version of Node.js can improve the DX of our users, and impact core functionalities.

Reviewer 4: Discussion: Something I proposed before bumping the node version is perhaps to issue a warning from the CLI if they are using the soon-to-be-dropped nodejs versions. This way users will see warnings a couple minors before before we bump it. I'm not sure if we want to do this, but if you think this is a good idea, maybe we can note about this here. But if not (for now), I'm also fine 😄

Author: I don't mind the warning, although we have to consider that this is another "chore" to take into consideration between releases. If there's an automated way to do so, that would be great

Reviewer 4: Yeah we'd have to remind ourselves if we do this, but given that we'd rarely do this unless we need to, I think it shouldn't take too much work. e.g. add the semver warnings, add a linear ticket to remind at a certain time, remove the semver warnings and update versions.

>   :::

Author: > Should a minor be able to deprecate the usage of an unsupported version of Node? For instance, should 4.6 be able to formally remove support for Node 19, which is completely unsupported by Node. (and overall is IIRC, less than 1% of our users, but part of the reason we can't update to latest Sharp)

I think so, as long as this is justified and in line with this document. If relying on Node.js 19 is a security hazard, then `4.6` is entitled to drop that Node.js version

- Introduction of new options in the integration hooks.
- Introduction of new functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

A minor release may also include smaller, patch changes at the same time.

### Major changes

> Major releases will include breaking changes to at least some existing code. These breaking changes are always documented in an "Upgrade to vX" guide in Astro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Major releases will include breaking changes to at least some existing code. These breaking changes are always documented in an ["Upgrade to vX" guide](#upgrade-guides) in Astro.
```

Major releases allow Astro to make significant changes not only to internal logic, but also in intended behavior and usage. Documentation will be updated to reflect the latest version only, and a **static, unmaintained snapshot of older docs** are available as a historical record for older projects that are not yet upgraded.

Major releases include changes such as:

> - Upgrade of minimal required Node.js version (minor or major), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v20.0.0`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Upgrade of minimum required Node.js version (minor or major), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v20.0.0`.
```

- Removal of previously deprecated functionalities.
- Changes of existing functionalities.
- Changes of existing options in the integration hooks.
- Changes of existing options and functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

A major release may also include some non-breaking changes and improvements that would normally be released separately in a minor or patch release.

### Exceptions

> - **Experimental features**. This allows Astro developers the greatest flexibility to explore, and even radically change course, during development. Therefore, the behaviour of these features can break in minor and patch changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Experimental features**. Releasing versions of Astro without adhering to semantic versioning allows Astro developers the greatest flexibility to explore, and even radically change course, during the development of experimental features. Therefore, the behavior of these features can break in minor and patch changes.
```

> - **Experimental features** are exempt from semantic versioning. This allows Astro developers the greatest flexibility to explore, and even radically change course, during development. Therefore, the behaviour  of these features can break in minor and patch changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Experimental features** are exempt from semantic versioning. This allows Astro developers the greatest flexibility to explore, and even radically change course, during development. Therefore, the behaviour of these features can break in minor and patch changes.
```

  These features are usually accompanied by ongoing, public [Request for Consideration (RFC) stage 3](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap#stage-3-rfc--development). It is expected that beta users will follow for updates, and leave early feedback to help guide development of these features.

  Once these features are out of their experimentation period, they will follow the normal semantic versioning contract.

> - **Improvements to the documentation** (e.g. reference and error messages) are also exempt from semantic versioning. This allows Astro to quickly update docs fixes and improvements in the cases where documentation source content is stored in the main `astro` repo.

Reviewer 3: I would say that mentioning this is unnecessary, as the previous paragraphs already either imply or purposely say this.

Author: Done!

> - **Improvements to the documentation** (e.g. reference and error messages). They are built from source from the `docs` repository. This allows Astro to quickly update docs fixes and improvements in the cases where documentation source content is stored in the main `astro` repo.

Reviewer 2: Ensuring consistency.
```suggestion
- **Improvements to the documentation** (e.g. reference and error messages). They are built from source from the `docs` repository. This allows Astro to quickly update docs fixes and improvements in the cases where documentation source content is stored in the main `astro` repository.
```

Reviewer: I will note that often we *intentionally* switch between equivalent words for sentence variety which helps for readability! Also, sometimes a shorter version of a word works better for rhythm in longer sentences and vice versa. 

No problems changing here, but just pointing out that 100% consistency isn't *always* the top priority!

Reviewer 2: Sounds good! Will keep this in mind moving forward :)!

Patches may be released for reasons such as:

- Internal changes that do not change Astro’s functionality:
  - refactors
  - performance improvements
  - increase or change in test coverage
  - aligning with stated documentation and expected behavior
- Improvements to logging and error messages.
- Re-releases after a failed release.

Patch changes also include **most bug fixes**, even in cases where users were taking advantage of existing unintended or undesirable behavior.

### Minor changes

Minor releases primarily introduce new features and improvements that you may wish to try, but require no changes to your code. Some existing features may also be **deprecated** (marked for deletion in a future version while continuing to function) in a minor release, giving you the opportunity to prepare for their eventual removal.

Minor releases include changes such as:

- **Deprecations** of existing features/options with a warning that they will be removed in an upcoming major release.
- Introduction of new functionalities.
- Introduction of new options in the integration hooks.
- Introduction of new functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

:::note

> Minor releases are meant to include only non-breaking changes.  However, *in rare cases*, Astro will include an upgrade of the minimum required Node.js version in a minor release (e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Minor releases are meant to include only non-breaking changes. However, *in rare cases* Astro will include an upgrade of the minimum required Node.js version in a minor release (e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`).
```

> :::note
> Minor releases are meant to include only non-breaking changes. However, *in rare cases* Astro will include an upgrade of the minimum required Node.js version in a minor release (e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`).
> 
> Astro is committed to adhering to semantic versioning, and will include an upgrade to a new version of Node.js in a minor release after careful analysis of a variety of factors, including the number of Astro projects running on incompatible versions, the security risk to developers of supporting an older version of Node.js, and the impact on Astro's core functionalities.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note
Minor releases are meant to include only non-breaking changes. However, *in rare cases* Astro will include an upgrade of the minimum required Node.js version in a minor release (e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`).

Astro is committed to adhering to semantic versioning and will include an upgrade to a new version of Node.js in a minor release **only after careful analysis of a variety of factors** including, but not limited to, the number of Astro projects running on incompatible versions, the security risk to developers of supporting an older version of Node.js, and the impact on Astro's core functionalities.
:::
```

- Removal of previously deprecated functionalities.
- Changes of existing functionalities.
- Changes of existing options in the integration hooks.
- Changes of existing options and functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

A major release may also include some non-breaking changes and improvements that would normally be released separately in a minor or patch release.

### Exceptions

- **Experimental features**. Releasing versions of Astro without adhering to semantic versioning allows Astro developers the greatest flexibility to explore, and even radically change course, during the development of experimental features. Therefore, the behavior of these features can break in minor and patch changes.

  These features are usually accompanied by ongoing, public [Request for Consideration (RFC) stage 3](https://github.com/withastro/roadmap#stage-3-rfc--development). It is expected that beta users will follow for updates, and leave early feedback to help guide development of these features.

  Once these features are out of their experimentation period, they will follow the normal semantic versioning contract.

> - **Improvements to the documentation** (e.g. reference and error messages). They are built from source from the `docs` repository. This allows Astro to quickly update docs fixes and improvements in the cases where documentation source content is stored in the main `astro` repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Improvements to the documentation** (e.g. reference and error messages). They are built from source for the `docs` repository. This allows Astro to quickly update docs fixes and improvements in the cases where documentation source content is stored in the main `astro` repository.
```
I think this should be *for* the docs repository, because they're not built *from* the docs repository. They're pulled in.

---

> title: Upgrade Astro

Author: That's on purpose. Sarah envisions this page to be a page that will contain upgrading guides.

The semantic versioning bit will be just a chapter

Minor releases include changes such as:

- **Deprecations** of existing features/options.
- Introduction of new functionalities.
- Upgrade of minimal required Node.js version (minor or patch), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v18.7.0`.
  :::note
  We take these kind of changes very seriously, and approve them only if we think that a new version of Node.js can improve the DX of our users, and impact core functionalities.
  :::
- Introduction of new options in the integration hooks.
- Introduction of new functionalities in `astro/app`, notably used for creating new adapters.

A minor release may also include smaller, patch changes at the same time.

### Major changes

Major releases will include breaking changes to at least some existing code. These breaking changes are always documented in an "Upgrade to vX" guide in Astro.

Major releases allow Astro to make significant changes not only to internal logic, but also in intended behavior and usage. Documentation will be updated to reflect the latest version only, and a **static, unmaintained snapshot of older docs** are available as a historical record for older projects that are not yet upgraded.

Major releases include changes such as:

> - Upgrade of minimal required Node.js version (minor or major), e.g. from `v18.4.0` to `v20.0.0`.

Reviewer 7: A minor bump in Node can be both a minor and a major for us?

Author: Yes. That's the controversial part that started the discussion, which ended up with the creation of this document. Usually, we want to try to keep Node.js **minor** bumps to a major release, but some situations came up that we felt needed clarification.

For example, the latest version of `sharp` requires a Node.js version that is more recent than our minimal version. Updating to that `sharp` version would allow us to fix some nasty workarounds and bugs.

Reviewer 7: I don't see any problem in bumping a minor in a minor in general. A minor version guarantees no breaking changes in the contract between the consumer and the thing being versioned. And that is upheld when bumping a dependency, one upgrade requiring another and when both are applied and both are minor the consumer project should not break.

We can't make guarantees about anything else in the project, just between the project and Astro itself. A bump in a patch version of a dependency can be a breaking change because some other dependency outside of Astro may no longer be de-duplicated and it's types won't match up. That doesn't affect the semver guarantees of Astro, it is the same as relying on an implementation detail
